Preliminaries: Pairwise Independent Hash Functions
--------------------------------------------------

One benefit of the count-min sketch is that it does not require p-wise
independent hash families (a strong independence guarantee that requires
sophisticated mathematical machinery); it only requires pairwise
independent hash functions.  Unfortunately, the subject of universal
hash families is not one usually covered in undergraduate computer
science, so in this section I will attempt to explicate enough of the
background theory so that we can generate the set of 2-independent hash
functions necessary to implement a count min sketch.

----

Our first question is one of terminology.  There is a somewhat diverse
set of naming conventions for hash families which I will attempt to
explicate here.  We will assume the following shared conventions: our
hash family is a family of functions from ``M → N`` where ``M = {0, 1,
..., m-1}`` and ``N = {0, 1, ..., n-1}`` with ``m >= n``.  M corresponds
to our “universe”, the possibly values being hashed, while N is the
range of the hash function.  This is the conventioned assumed by Motwani
and Raghavan in *Randomized Algorithms*, which Cormode and Muthukrishnan
reference in their paper.

The weakest independence guarantee is as follows:

    (WEAK) UNIVERSAL HASH FAMILY or (WEAK) 2-UNIVERSAL HASH FAMILY

    For all x, y ∈ M such that x != y, and for h chosen uniformly at
    random from H, ::

        Pr[h(x) = h(y)] ≤ 1/n

    We shall abbreviate this subsequently as::

        ∀ x,y ∈ M, x != y. Pr[h(x) = h(y)] ≤ 1/n

(Errata: One set of notes [1] I consulted claimed that ``Pr[h(x) = h(y)
= d/n]`` indicates a d-universal family; however, this appears to
contradict the common formulation of a weak 2-universal hash family.
Maybe this is an off by one?]

Note that, definitionally speaking, 2-universal != 2-independent.  The
name 2-universal alludes to the fact that we are only verifying the
probabilities pairwise between elements of the universe, so they behave
*like* pairwise independent random variables.  Strictly speaking, this
is weaker than saying they are actually pairwise independent, as the
following definition says:

    STRONG UNIVERSAL HASH FAMILY
    or (STRONGLY) 2-INDEPENDENT UNIVERSAL HASH FAMILY::

        ∀ x,y ∈ M, a,b ∈ N.
            Pr[h(x) = a ∧ h(y) = b] <= 1/n²



[1] http://courses.csail.mit.edu/6.851/spring07/erik/L11.pdf
